# SDWIG plenary meeting August 19th 2021

Present: Linda van den Brink, Scott Simmons, Peter Parslow

Regrets: Jeremy Tandy

(because of limited attendance no minutes recorded in IRC)

## Topic: charter
Linda: the SDW WG charter passed AC vote. The W3C Advisory Committee review closed this week with 24 votes of support and no objections. All that's left is for the Director to approve the WG. After transitioning back to a Working Group, the SDW group will continue its coordinating role between OGC and W3C, as well as develop best practices that encourage better sharing of spatial data and the Web, but will also be able to further develop two standards we previously published: OWL Time and SOSA/SSN. As an interest group, we were only able to do minor maintenance on these standards.

## Topic: SDW 2022 paragraph
https://github.com/w3c/sdw/blob/gh-pages/roadmap/sdw2022.md

Linda reads first section "Injecting geo into the web"
- Resonates with both Scott and Peter.
- Peter: computational web workflow is necessary, but not spatial, so we would have to try to influence other groups to do that - the SDW group could work on stating our requirements / use case. Groups that could be targetted are the W3C smart cities group, maybe also Big Data groups, although they may be less interested in chaining of small components.
- Scott: a small improvement to the first paragrah would be to add the statement that we have focused on getting (spatial) data on the web; we got the data to the web succesfully! And that now there is a need to focus on enabling people to use it / do more with it.
- Scott: The idea of geospatial functions  resonates with the idea of API building blocks in OGC. 
- Scott confirms that visualisation is important for users and needs some attention.
- Linda: maps for HTML would fall under that. 

Linda reads second section "Citizen-friendly information management" 
- Scott: don't know if the second paragraph is altogether correct. OGC mission is now focused on FAIR. We haven't done much reflected in standards yet, but this will quickly start happening. W3C is probably at the same point of evolution. GPR has done much to influence this.
- Peter: it is not a geo specific issue, but related to all Web data. What you are talking about here is data centered security, that is different from what NATO STANAG standards are targetting. 
- Linda: I'm hearing that there is less need to influence OGC or W3C on this issue, the ball is already rolling. 
- Scott: even so it is good to have this section in here, it is a current and important topic. 
- Peter: Which SOLID are you referring to in the text?
- Linda: https://solidproject.org. Am looking for someone to come talk to the SDW group about SOLID and how it fits in with what we do.
- Peter: Looks interesting. SDW should figure out if it is useful to register interest with the W3C SOLID community group. 

Linda reads third section "Moving linked data / semantic Web out of its niche"
- Scott: This is important, but really hard to do. 
- Peter: In UK we did a survey on this. Over half of data publishers want to publish their data as linked data, but only very few responders said they want to consume it. Having the high level nuanced picture would really help. It is still a good solution for some problems; it would help to have insights with the W3C/OGC stamp (because it tends to get people to listen). A thought piece on linked data in the geo world, nuanced rather than evangelist.
- Linda: I could use this for the Dutch community as well; I see API fans and linked data fans, but both should be part of a larger picture. In the last SDW telco, people were most in agreement with this point about moving linked data out of its niche, and arguing that data interoperability is still a problem. One of the things that comes up is the http redirect problem as a complicating factor. Some group members are willing to work on that. 
- Peter: I have been advocating within Ordnance Survey that APIs should be able to play the role of persistent URI resolvers. And with my ISO hat on: TC 211 wants to get better at semantic web/ ontology / OWL. We are trying to get a liaison with W3C.