# Spatial Data on the Web 2022 – where next to drive impact from geospatial data 
## Injecting geo into the web
When we look at smart cities and digital twins [of a city/area/country], a big part of the challenge is the need for not only integrating heterogeneous static datasets (geospatial and other), but combining static data with dynamic data, output from models, simulations, and algorithms. This is a step further than what SDW has been about so far. How will we interface with models/simulations/algorithms? These need to become functions, we can imagine them as little building blocks that could be standardized and published on the Web so anyone could insert them into their own API. Basic geospatial functions: within, nearest neighbour, CRS transformation, shortest path, etc. The OGC Routing API is perhaps an early example of this. 

All these components need to be combined using computational web workflows. Again, in a smart city / digital twin environment there is a need for orchestration / pipelining / workflow in order to tie all these different things (static data, dynamic data, functions) together into a visualization of the outcome(s), usually a rendered map. Combining all these components is like FME / ETL but on the Web. Although there are several standards in this area, these have never been widely adopted: we note XPROC (never widely used?), WPS (specific to geo domain), and MQTT.

Summarizing, we see several things that need to be tackled but have not been within scope of the SDW group before: 
- geospatial function 'web building blocks'
- web workflows
- rendering and visualising spatial data on the web

## Citizen-friendly information management
With the rise of smart cities and digital twins, combinations of data, models, and algorithms will be more and more used in decision-making by governments and companies. These decisions will affect the daily lives of people, and thus, data, models, and algorithms will. Therefore, things like provenance, reliability, trust, authenticity of data become very important. Even more so when all these sources of information are combined. Similarly, things like security, digital signatures, authentication/authorisation etc will become more important. 

OGC is not strongly engaged in issues like these. Most of the work that touches on this is related to the Defense industry (OGC security testbeds, using NATO STANAG standards), and does not give much insight for citizen-friendly information management. 

Privacy and ownership of personal data is another important aspect. Here SOLID could play a major role. If a citizen’s data is in a data store controlled by the person themselves, this could mean you don’t need to give your date of birth, income or place of residence etc to organizations, but a service could interact with your data and check ‘is this person over age 18’, for example. 

## Moving linked data / semantic Web  out of its niche
We need to move linked data / semantic Web from “specialist” to “general Web-developer friendly” in the same way as we did for geospatial data. Currently this still seems to be the domain of experts, which means it’s not percolating through to deliver general impact. A coherent high level, nuanced picture of the role of semantic / linked data technology in Web architecture as well as relative to the role of Web APIs is currently missing. 

## Impact
We would want/think our efforts to impact work mostly within OGC (injecting geo into the Web, standardizing geo building blocks, engaging OGC in citizen-friendly information management). But we could also target W3C, mostly the soon-to-be Smart Cities IG (see [charter](http://w3c.github.io/wot/charters/smart-cities/smart-cities-ig-charter.html)). E.g. getting them to look at computational web workflows and considering geospatial aspects of that; we might get them to collaborate with OGC on the citizen friendly information topic, and perhaps also the API + linked data positioning. 
